
<p>
<br/>

<br/>

<br/>

</p>

<h1 id="home">Home</h1>
<div class="level1">

<p>
Welcome to <strong>Fractal10</strong> DokuWiki Template. 
</p>

<p>
Tired of making non linear mindmap by yourself ? This DokuWiki template create automatically interactive networks using Rscript and Visnetwork library for every namespace in your wiki. 
</p>
<ul>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Nodes in the network correspond to pages in the namespaces. </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Edges of the network correspond to internal links between pages. </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> There is also two side columns on every page displaying parent pages on the left and child pages on the right. </div>
</li>
</ul>

<p>
The network builds up as you create you wiki pages and connect them with internal links. It uses community algorithm to allocates different collors to nodes and the sizes of nodes are according to their degree, i.e. the number of edges they connect to. 
</p>

</div>

<h2 id="notes">Notes</h2>
<div class="level2">
<ul>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   Use the Update <strong>Network button</strong> in footer to create a new network and update links.</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   The <strong>Top Bar</strong> represent the different namespaces.</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   The <strong>Sitemap</strong> button in footer allows to access all pages, even hiden one.</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   Click on a node to access node page.</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   Click anywhere inside the network to deselct the current node</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   A namespace can have a exclude page that contains some settings.</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   To modify site map, edit : <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=sitemap" class="wikilink1" title="sitemap" data-wiki-id="sitemap">sitemap</a></div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li">   To modify top bar, edit : <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=topbar" class="wikilink1" title="topbar" data-wiki-id="topbar">topbar</a></div>
</li>
</ul>

</div>

<h2 id="what_needs_doing">What Needs Doing</h2>
<div class="level2">
<ol>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Creat network for root level</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Merge setting page with exclude page</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Have different algirtm available in setting</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Have settings for zoom and drag</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> Edit footer</div>
</li>
</ol>

</div>
