
<h1 id="gradual_trainings">6 Gradual Trainings</h1>
<div class="level1">

<p>
Just as the ocean has a gradual shelf, a gradual slope, a gradual inclination, with a sudden drop-off only after a long stretch, in the same way this Doctrine and Discipline (dhamma-vinaya) has a gradual training, a gradual performance, a gradual progression, with a penetration to gnosis only after a long stretch.
</p>

<p>
— Ud 5.5
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
Monks, I do not say that the attainment of gnosis is all at once. Rather, the attainment of gnosis is after gradual training, gradual action, gradual practice. And how is there the attainment of gnosis after gradual training, gradual action, gradual practice? There is the case where, when conviction has arisen, one visits [a teacher]. Having visited, one grows close. Having grown close, one lends ear. Having lent ear, one hears the Dhamma. Having heard the Dhamma, one remembers it. Remembering, one penetrates the meaning of the teachings. Penetrating the meaning, one comes to an agreement through pondering the teachings. There being an agreement through pondering the teachings, desire arises. When desire has arisen, one is willing. When one is willing, one contemplates. Having contemplated, one makes an exertion. Having made an exertion, one realizes with the body the ultimate truth and, having penetrated it with discernment, sees it.
</p>

<p>
— MN 70
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
Then the Blessed One, having encompassed the awareness of the entire assembly with his awareness, asked himself, “Now who here is capable of understanding the Dhamma?” He saw Suppabuddha the leper sitting in the assembly, and on seeing him the thought occurred to him, “This person here is capable of understanding the Dhamma.” So, aiming at Suppabuddha the leper, he gave a step-by-step talk, i.e., 
</p>
<ol>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> a talk on <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dhamma:generosity" class="wikilink1" title="dhamma:generosity" data-wiki-id="dhamma:generosity">giving</a>, </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> a talk on <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dhamma:virtue" class="wikilink1" title="dhamma:virtue" data-wiki-id="dhamma:virtue">virtue</a>, </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> a talk on <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dhamma:heaven" class="wikilink1" title="dhamma:heaven" data-wiki-id="dhamma:heaven">heaven</a>; </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> he declared the <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dhamma:drawbacks" class="wikilink1" title="dhamma:drawbacks" data-wiki-id="dhamma:drawbacks">drawbacks, degradation, &amp; corruption of sensual passions</a>, and </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> the rewards of <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dhamma:renunciation" class="wikilink1" title="dhamma:renunciation" data-wiki-id="dhamma:renunciation">renunciation</a>. </div>
</li>
</ol>

<p>
Then when he saw that Suppabuddha the leper&#039;s mind was ready, malleable, free from hindrances, elated, &amp; bright, he then gave the Dhamma-talk peculiar to Awakened Ones, i.e.,
</p>

<p>
&emsp;&emsp; 6. <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dhamma:4_noble_truths" class="wikilink1" title="dhamma:4_noble_truths" data-wiki-id="dhamma:4_noble_truths">stress, origination, cessation, &amp; path</a>. 
</p>

<p>
And just as a clean cloth, free of stains, would properly absorb a dye, in the same way, as Suppabuddha the leper was sitting in that very seat, the dustless, stainless Dhamma eye arose within him, “Whatever is subject to origination is all subject to cessation.”
</p>

<p>
— Ud 5.3
</p>

</div>
