
<h1 id="establishings_of_mindfulness">4 Establishings of Mindfulness</h1>
<div class="level1">

<p>
“This is the direct path for the purification of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow &amp; lamentation, for the disappearance of pain &amp; distress, for the attainment of the right method, &amp; for the realization of unbinding—in other words, <em>the four establishings of mindfulness</em>. Which four?
</p>

<p>
“There is the case where a monk remains focused
</p>
<ol>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <em>on the body</em> in &amp; of itself—ardent, alert, &amp; mindful—subduing greed &amp; distress with reference to the world. He remains focused </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <em>on feelings…</em> </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <em>on mind…</em> </div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> <em>on mental qualities</em> in &amp; of themselves—ardent, alert, &amp; mindful—subduing greed &amp; distress with reference to the world.”</div>
</li>
</ol>

<p>
&emsp; — MN 10
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
“Sāriputta, suppose that I had four disciples with a 100-year life span, living for 100 years, and endowed with excellent mindfulness, retention, recall, &amp; keenness of discernment. Just as an archer with a good bow—trained, dexterous, &amp; practiced—could easily shoot a light arrow across the shadow of a palmyra tree, they—endowed with that great an extent of mindfulness, that great an extent of retention, that great an extent of recall, &amp; that keenness of discernment—would ask me one question after another on the four establishings of mindfulness. And I, asked again &amp; again, would answer. Answered, they would remember what I had answered, and they wouldn’t counter-question me about it a second time more. Aside from eating, drinking, chewing, &amp; savoring, aside from urinating &amp; defecating, aside from relieving sleepiness &amp; weariness, there would be no ending of the Tathāgata’s Dhamma teaching, there would be no ending of the Tathāgata’s phrasing of Dhamma statements, there would be no ending of the Tathāgata’s quick-wittedness (in answering) questions; but those four disciples of mine, with their 100-year life span, living for 100 years, would die with the passing of 100 years.”
</p>

<p>
&emsp; — MN 12
</p>

</div>
