
<h1 id="ignorance">Ignorance</h1>
<div class="level1">

<p>
From ignorance as a <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dependant_arising:ignorance#test" class="wikilink1" title="dependant_arising:ignorance" data-wiki-id="dependant_arising:ignorance">requisite</a> condition come <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dependant_arising:fabrication" class="wikilink1" title="dependant_arising:fabrication" data-wiki-id="dependant_arising:fabrication">fabrications</a>.
</p>

<p>
test <a name="mybookmark" id="mybookmark"></a>
</p>

<p>
test <a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dependant_arising:ignorance#consciousness" class="wikilink1" title="dependant_arising:ignorance" data-wiki-id="dependant_arising:ignorance">anchor_text</a>
</p>

<p>
From ignorance as a requisite condition come fabricationsc.<br/>

From fabrications as a requisite condition comes 
</p>
</p><a name="consciousness">consciousness</a><p>
<p>
.<br/>

From consciousness as a requisite condition comes name-&amp;-form.<br/>

From name-and-form as a requisite condition come the six sense media.<br/>

From the six sense media as a requisite condition comes contact.<br/>

From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling.<br/>

From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving.<br/>

From craving as a requisite condition comes.<br/>

From clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming.<br/>

From becoming as a requisite condition comes birth.<br/>

From birth as a requisite condition, then aging-&amp;-death, sorrow, lamentation,
pain, distress, and despair come into play. Such is the origination of this entire
mass of stress &amp; suffering.
</p>

<p>
<a href="/~lancelot/GitHub/fractaldhamma/doku.php?id=dependant_arising:ignorance#mybookmark" class="wikilink1" title="dependant_arising:ignorance" data-wiki-id="dependant_arising:ignorance">anchor_text</a>
</p>

<p>
This is a == test == that is very interesting
</p>

<p>
== test == that is very interesting
</p>

<p>
This is a
</p>

</div>

<h5 id="test">test</h5>
<div class="level5">

</div>

<h5 id="test1">test</h5>
<div class="level5">

</div>
