
<h1 id="noble_truth_of_cessation">Noble Truth of Cessation</h1>
<div class="level1">

<p>
“And this, monks, is the noble truth of the cessation of dukkha: the remainderless fading &amp; cessation, renunciation, relinquishment, release, &amp; letting go of that very craving.”
</p>

<p>
— SN 56.11
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
“Among whatever qualities there may be, fabricated or unfabricated, the quality of dispassion — the subduing of intoxication, the elimination of thirst, the uprooting of attachment, the breaking of the round, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation, the realization of Unbinding — is considered supreme. Those who have confidence in the quality of dispassion have confidence in what is supreme; and for those with confidence in the supreme, supreme is the result.”
</p>

<p>
— Iti 90
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
Stilling: the hallmark of the goal
“This is peace, this is exquisite — the stilling of all fabrications, the relinquishment of all acquisitions, the ending of craving, dispassion, cessation, Unbinding.”
</p>

<p>
— MN 64
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
“Monks, the ending of the effluents is for one who knows &amp; sees, I tell you, not for one who does not know &amp; does not see. For one who knows what &amp; sees what is there the ending of effluents? &#039;Such is form, such its origination, such its disappearance. Such is feeling, such its origination, such its disappearance. Such is perception, such its origination, such its disappearance. Such are fabrications, such their origination, such their disappearance. Such is consciousness, such its origination, such its disappearance.&#039; The ending of the effluents is for one who knows in this way &amp; sees in this way.
</p>

<p>
“The knowledge of ending in the presence of ending has its prerequisite, I tell you. It is not without a prerequisite. And what is its prerequisite? Release… Release has its prerequisite, I tell you. It is not without a prerequisite. And what is its prerequisite? Dispassion… Disenchantment… Knowledge &amp; vision of things as they actually are present…Concentration… Pleasure… Serenity… Rapture… Joy… Conviction… Stress… Birth… Becoming… Clinging… Craving… Feeling… Contact… The six sense media… Name-&amp;-form… Consciousness… Fabrications… Fabrications have their prerequisite, I tell you. They are not without a prerequisite. And what is their prerequisite? Ignorance…
</p>

<p>
“Just as when the gods pour rain in heavy drops &amp; crash thunder on the upper mountains: The water, flowing down along the slopes, fills the mountain clefts &amp; rifts &amp; gullies. When the mountain clefts &amp; rifts &amp; gullies are full, they fill the little ponds. When the little ponds are full, they fill the big lakes… the little rivers… the big rivers. When the big rivers are full, they fill the great ocean. In the same way:
</p>
<ol>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> fabrications have ignorance as their prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> consciousness has fabrications as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> name-&amp;-form has consciousness as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> the six sense media have name-&amp;-form as their prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> contact has the six sense media as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> feeling has contact as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> craving has feeling as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> clinging has craving as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> becoming has clinging as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> birth has becoming as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> stress &amp; suffering have birth as their prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> conviction has stress &amp; suffering as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> joy has conviction as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> rapture has joy as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> serenity has rapture as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> pleasure has serenity as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> concentration has pleasure as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> knowledge &amp; vision of things as they actually are present has concentration as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> disenchantment has knowledge &amp; vision of things as they actually are present as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> dispassion has disenchantment as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> release has dispassion as its prerequisite,</div>
</li>
<li class="level1"><div class="li"> knowledge of ending has release as its prerequisite.”</div>
</li>
</ol>

<p>
— SN 12.23
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
“From the remainderless fading &amp; cessation of that very ignorance, there no longer exists [the sense of] the body on account of which that pleasure &amp; pain internally arise. There no longer exists the speech… the intellect on account of which that pleasure &amp; pain internally arise. There no longer exists the field, the site, the dimension, or the issue on account of which that pleasure &amp; pain internally arise.”
</p>

<p>
— SN 12.25
</p>

<p>
<p style="text-align:center;"> ¶ </p>
</p>

<p>
This/That Conditionality
“And what is the noble method that is rightly seen and rightly ferreted out by discernment? There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones notices:
</p>

<p>
When this is, that is.
From the arising of this comes the arising of that.
When this isn&#039;t, that isn&#039;t.
From the cessation of this comes the cessation of that.
“In other words:
</p>

<p>
“From ignorance as a requisite condition come fabrications. From fabrications as a requisite condition comes consciousness. From consciousness as a requisite condition comes name-and-form. From name-and-form as a requisite condition come the six sense media. From the six sense media as a requisite condition comes contact. From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling. From feeling as a requisite condition comes craving. From craving as a requisite condition comes clinging/sustenance. From clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming. From becoming as a requisite condition comes birth. From birth as a requisite condition, then old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, and despair come into play. Such is the origination of this entire mass of stress and suffering.
</p>

<p>
“Now from the remainderless fading and cessation of that very ignorance comes the cessation of fabrications. From the cessation of fabrications comes the cessation of consciousness. From the cessation of consciousness comes the cessation of name-and-form. From the cessation of name-and-form comes the cessation of the six sense media. From the cessation of the six sense media comes the cessation of contact. From the cessation of contact comes the cessation of feeling. From the cessation of feeling comes the cessation of craving. From the cessation of craving comes the cessation of clinging/sustenance. From the cessation of clinging/sustenance comes the cessation of becoming. From the cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth. From the cessation of birth, then old age and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, and despair all cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of stress and suffering.
</p>

<p>
“This is the noble method that is rightly seen and rightly ferreted out by discernment.”
</p>

<p>
— AN 10.92
</p>

</div>
